Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricard Lobs, and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Doctor Edward
Hagen. He's professor of evolutionary anthropology at Washington State
University. And today we're going to talk about his
critique of Doctor Agustin Fuentes's book Sex Is a
Spectrum. I had Doctor Fuentes on the show back
in April or May, and today we're going to
talk about the critique of his book. So Doctor
Hagen, welcome back to the show. It's always a
pleasure to everyone.
Yeah, thanks. Thanks for inviting me.
OK, so before we get into specific er aspects
of your critique, just to start with a general
question, what was your overall view of Doctor Fuentes's
book, Sex is a Specter?
Um, I was pretty disappointed in the book because
it's, it's not, um, it's not unscientific, uh, but
it's not really scientific either. Um, IT'S pretty.
What, what do you mean by that
exactly? Yeah, well, for me anyway, and I think
for many folks, science involves providing explanations for the
world. Why is the world the way it is
and not some other way. And when we read
a book on science, at least what I'm expecting
and I would imagine many readers are expecting is
some explanations. They might be the right ones, they
might be the wrong ones, but most of us
kind of view that as the goal or aim
of science, which is to explain all of the
diverse diversity of the natural world. And those explanations
were almost entirely missing from this book. There was
um a smorgasbord of, of examples of, of diversity
in the biological world, but very, very rarely any
explanations for that. And that really contrasts with evolutionary
biology, which has provided a wide range of explanations.
Um, SO, since Darwin in the last, you know,
150 years, the The goal has been to explain
biological diversity, and there's been a lot of success.
And of course there's still much debate, uh, about
it. We're, we're hardly at the end of the
road. But the fact that many explanations do exist
and have been tested and have quite a bit
of um empirical support means that in my view,
uh, A successful science book on biological diversity. WOULD
provide explanations for that diversity, including the debates, you
know, these folks think the explanation is A and
these folks think the explanation is B, but those
were almost entirely missing from the book. So for
me, that was very disappointing and unsatisfying.
Yes, uh, I'm, I am aware of that, I
mean, even though people who say or claim that
sex is a spectrum are still, I think, a
minority among evolutionary biologists, evolutionary anthropologists, and other evolutionary
theorists, uh, I know that there's an ongoing debate
on that topic, and I mean, but when you
say. That he fails, Doctor Fuentes fails to provide
explanations for many of the examples of animals and
species that he describes in the book. Uh, I
mean, why do you think that uh that is
a problem specifically? I mean, why are the explanations
important and specifically in this context of debating sex?
Well, um, the reason is that sex. Provides a
lot of those explanations. So, uh, if you're going
to jump into the debate, what you need to
do, the, the debate is going to really turn
on which concepts provide the best explanations. That's what
the debate is going to turn on. And so
if you jump into this debate, you need to
show that your concepts, your frameworks, your theories provide
better explanations or at least competing explanations with the
ones that already exist. And so the failure to
do that is really a failure of the whole
premise of the book, that there's a better way,
a new framework. In fact, Fuentes promises to provide
us a new framework for thinking about biological diversity,
but he doesn't. So, he is the one that
set up uh The um expectations and then fails
to meet them. So, yeah, so sex um is
one of our most powerful explanations for biological diversity,
one of our most successful explanations. And if you
want to challenge the current views of that, I
think that's great. Please do. Science really needs critics.
Everybody, in fact, everybody should be a critic of
your, of your own theories as well. Uh, BUT
to do that, you need to provide alternatives, or
at least you need to show where these theories
fail. And he really didn't do that. So, he
didn't show that the, the existing theories really failed
to explain what they purported to explain, nor did
he provide. Any alternatives that explain the facts better
than the existing ones, or at least our candidates
to compete with existing explanations. So that's why it's
important.
Mhm. Yes, er, and I mean, let me just
take a step back and then I'll go through
the main topics you explore in your critique. How
would you characterize his main argument? I mean, when
he argues that instead of it being a binary,
that sex is a spectrum, what do you think
is the argument he tries to make for that?
Well, so his argument, which is not really his
argument, uh, but that when you look across all
the domains of life, um, in fact, two of
the three big branches of life don't have sex,
so bacteria and archaea, um. They reproduce clonally. They
don't reproduce sexually. So it doesn't even apply to
actually the most diverse, uh, domains of, of life
on this planet, but it does apply almost universally
to our branch of the domain of life, the
eukaryotes. And What we see when we look at,
you know, literally millions of species in the eukaryot
that do reproduce sexually is that there's a lot
of diversity. And so Fuentes is absolutely correct that
there's no In many species, there's not even two
sexes. There's, there doesn't, that concept doesn't even apply.
Even if they're reproducing sexually, we might get into
that in a little bit more detail in a
bit. Um, BUT even if there are sexes, um,
there's no single template for what it means to
be a female or what it means to be
a male or, um. And so, Fuentes is absolutely
correct about that, but that's not new. Um, THAT,
that has been recognized since they, since evolutionary biology
became a discipline, and there are many, many attempts
to explain why there are females and males in
the first place, we may get into that, but
when there are, why females have these properties and
males have those properties, um, this is not new.
So, so Fuentes is not. Um, HE is correct
in, in explaining that, um, that particular empirical fact,
um, but then he doesn't really go any further.
And so, that's, that's the disappointing aspect of it.
It's not that he's gets anything really horribly wrong,
but he doesn't advance the debate in any meaningful
way.
OK, so let's go through some basics here because
I also want for people to understand uh the
kind of critique you do in your, uh, post,
um, and also for people to, who don't. Who
are not aware of this to get a little
bit of the biological or the basics in biology
here. So where does sex come from? How and
why has it evolved?
Yeah, so this would be, uh, and, and, you
know, this is going to be probably the longest
answer of our interview here because this is an
extraordinarily complex topic, and I want to say from
the outset, uh, my This is not my area
of expertise. I am an evolutionary anthropologist. I study
human behavior and the evolution of human behavior and
human cognition, and I draw on some of the
results of these theories for the evolution of sex
and the evolution of the two sexes. Those are
different. Um, SO, I, I want to say right
from the outset that I'm, I'm not an expert
in this area, but I'll, I'll give a, hopefully,
uh, uh, a reasonable explanation here. And it goes,
we have to really travel back in time quite
a ways to begin to understand what's going on
here. Um. And we should really go all the
way back to the formation of the Earth, which
is maybe about 4.5 billion years ago. That's our
time frame. It's this enormous expanse of time that
we need to consider. And sometime after the formation
of the Earth, life arises on the planet. We're
not sure exactly when, but maybe, maybe even as
early as 4 billion years ago or even a
little bit earlier than that. Um. And at some
point, we have what's this fictional or theoretical concept
called the last universal common ancestor, or Lucca. Um,
And that arises, and that, and we, we can
be pretty sure that there is this last universal
common ancestor because all life on Earth is using
the same DNA code and the same nucleotides essentially,
and proteins. So the similarities of all living things
suggest that we all derive from this one single
ancestral conceptual species, Luca. Um, AND then sometime after
that, here's the, um, Luca divides into two big
branches, um, of life, the bacteria, these are single-celled
organisms, and a very similar group of organisms called
the archaea. And, um, these reproduce clonally. They basically
copy their DNA into their daughter cells, basically clonal
division. And they do not um reproduce sexually, so
they do not combine the genomes of two parents
into the genomes of offsprings. There is something called
horizontal gene transfer, we won't get into that, but
there's pretty widespread agreement that these groups don't reproduce
sexually. Now, sometime after this, uh, what we think
happened, um, and this is going to happen in
the time period, probably between 1 billion and 2
or 2.5 billion years ago. I, um Species of
archaea incorporates a bacterium in a symbiotic relationship. Uh,
THAT forms a third branch of life, the eukaryotes,
and we are eukaryotes. And eukaryotic cells are much
more complex than the prokaryotic cells of the, of
these ancestors. And um, Almost all eukaryotes reproduce sexually,
at least at some point in their life cycle.
Um, AND, and all, uh, multicellular, uh, or almost
all multicellular life forms like plants and animals and
fungi are eukaryotic species, but not all eukaryotes are
multicellular. Many like yeast, for example, is a single-celled
organism. But even yeast, the single-celled organisms reproduce sexually.
What does that mean? That the um, Parents form
a, um, and that basically every organism has exactly
2 parents and they get half their DNA from
one parent and half their DNA from the other.
Now, the question is, why did that evolve? And
the answer is we don't know. Uh, THERE are
many, many, many theories about why this very cumbersome
reproductive system evolved, but there's no consensus on why
it evolved. Um, I can just give you a
taste of, of some of the ideas, um. So,
and, and we to really understand the mystery of
this, this is a really costly way to reproduce,
because if you're going to Require that two distinct
individuals somehow have their genomes combined into a new
offspring. Um, THAT means you have to find a
mate and imagine this is all happening in marine
environments, probably ocean environments, you know, 1 to 2
billion years ago, um, in this vast ocean, how
are One individual going to find a member of,
you know, uh, of the other of their same
species and, you know, somehow get their genomes to
combine. So, there's just the, the chance, you know,
the problem of finding a mate is, is very,
very difficult. Now, at this early stage, There are
not two sexes. There's sexual reproduction. But there are
not two sexes, there are two parents. And the
two parents is going to be fundamental to why
we eventually get two sexes. But the, at least
the theorizing at this point is that early on,
um, there are not two sexes. Um, NOW, why
is this cumbersome system evolving? One idea is that
somehow genetic diversity, that the two parents' genomes are
going to be slightly different, and therefore the offspring
is going to be genetically different from either parent,
and that there might be some advantage that outweighs
the costs of sexual reproduction. Um. That's one idea.
Now, what could that be? It could be that
the environment of the offspring is different from the
environment of the parents, and therefore being genetically different,
uh, might give at least some of the offspring
some advantages for surviving and reproducing in this new
environment. And one of the main ideas about what
that new environment might be, might be something like
parasites or pathogens that are constantly co-evolving um with
their hosts, and If you want to avoid being
infected by the same pathogens that infect your parents,
it might be good to be genetically different from
them. Or if you're just in a, in a
very different environment, um, it could be good for
parents to kind of hedge their bets and produce
offspring with a number of different genetic combinations. Another
idea is this would be a way to get
rid of bad mutations. Bad mutations are happening all
the time, and if you just clonally reproduce, your
offspring will, with 100% certainty, have those bad genetic
mutations. But if you combine part of your genome
with part of a parent, It's unlikely that um
your mate will have the same bad mutations that
you do, and your offspring, there are more, you
might be able to form offspring that can basically
get rid of some of those bad mutations. Um,
YOU might form, you know, new combinations of genes
that have advantages. Those are, those are some of
the other ideas. Um, SO these are just a
small fraction of, of the many, many ideas for
why sex, oh, and then a third really important
idea is DNA repair. Um, IF you've got a
bad mutation in, in one part of your genome
and you combine it with a genome that doesn't
have that bad mutation, DNA repair mechanisms could operate
there so that the offspring is more likely to
have a better functioning genome. So, these are just
some of the, of the various ideas out there.
There's no consensus about this, um. But then once
uh sexual reproduction evolved, and this seems to characterize
all eukaryotes almost all. And there are some asexual
species, but they tend to be pretty rare. Um,
THEN we get. Uh, A whole different dynamic taking
place now where, um, there's all kinds of evolutionary
dynamics come into play when you now have two
different individuals having to combine their genomes into um
a single offspring. So that's And that is maybe
all happening at least prior to 1 billion years
ago. So when we're talking about sex, Uh, and
then the eventual evolution of the sexes, which we
haven't gotten to yet. Um, WE really need to
think that this is something that applies over very,
very deep time and across millions and millions of
eukaryotic species, not just, it's not something unique to
us humans or our little branch of the tree
of life. It's a very widespread, um, that has
deep importance for understanding diversity across one of the
three main branches of life.
OK, so let's get then into the evolution of
the sexes, but before that, tell us about the
concept of anisogamy and why is that important to
then understand uh how and why each sex evolved
and how we define each of the sexes.
Yeah, so imagine we're 1 billion years ago in
the warm oceans of early Earth, let's say, and
you're a single-celled organism, and you are going to
have to get your part of your genome to
combine with the part of a genome of another
individual. How is that going to happen? Um, NOW,
in some species, those two individuals actually join and
that DNA, of course, in eukaryotes is in the
nucleus, and they actually Exchange, uh, what are called
micronuclei. Um, SO there's this direct transfer of, of
the nucleus. However, in most species, the way they
do this is they produce a gamete. This is
a sex cell. So, this is a cell that
contains um the haploid genome of each parent. And
those two cells Uh, have to find, um, each
of those cells has to find uh a cell
of another individual, a mate, and fuse. And So,
we now begin to think about the evolution of
these gametes and what choices the parents have when
they are making gametes. And the question is, what,
what decisions, quote unquote, or, you know, scare quotes
here, uh, do these single-celled organisms make when they
are deciding how to make their gametes? Well, they're,
um, there's the, uh, property of size, how big
should the gametes be, and why does that matter?
And something about type, and I'll talk about that
in a moment, um, something about mobility, um, could
be really important. So how do these play into
this whole process? Well, the whole, we think. The
reason sex evolved is somehow there's some benefit of
combining your genome with the genome of a different
individual. So what that means is if you're producing
gametes, you don't want your gametes to fuse with
your own gametes. Now, there are species that do
that. Uh, BUT in general, you would want your
gametes to fuse with the gametes of a different
individual.
Yeah, but there's, for example, species where there's parthenogenesis,
right? Yeah, so there, there, there, there's definitely all
kinds of asexual reproduction and self-fertilization that, that definitely
happens for absolute sure, um, but we think. That
the benefits of sexual reproduction largely derive from combining
um the genomes of different individuals, is something about
the genetic differences really lead to benefits somehow. Um,
AND so for that to be the case. Um,
YOU would want to prevent your gametes from fusing
with your own gametes, and only fuse with the
gametes of other individuals. So, that leads to the
evolution of order called mating types, where the gametes
are basically the same, except they have molecular mechanisms
that define basically a genetic locus on their genome
that says you're type A and you're type B.
And actually the way they refer to mating types
is the plus type. In the minus type, typically.
And there are typically two types, um, in these
single-celled organisms that are reproducing sexually by producing gametes.
Now, some species have many, many types, sometimes hundreds
or thousands. Um, BUT typically, there are two types.
And so, if you're a plus type, you will
only fuse with minus types and minus types will
only fuse with plus types. And one of the
theories for that, is that this ensures that you're
going to uh mate or fuse uh your gametes
with the gametes of another individual because they are
a different type. OK, so now we have mating
types. So that's one decision. What type Uh, should
I be? Now, these gametes are releasing these gametes
out into the ocean, into some marine environment, we
think. That gamete has to survive out in the
wild. Um, IT'S in some sense, it's own little
organism. And so that means that you need to
provision it. The parent needs to provision the offspring,
or the offspring, excuse me, the gamete. Um, AND
so the presumption is here that bigger gametes are
going to be better able to survive and then
develop into successfully into offspring that themselves can survive
and reproduce. However, There's a trade-off. When you produce
bigger gametes, that means providing more resources into each
gamete. But if resources are limited, and they always
are, producing bigger gametes means producing fewer of them.
And so, parents then have a choice, OK, what
type should my gamete be, number one, but then
how big should it be? Should it be bigger,
in which case, it's more likely to survive and
reproduce, but I can produce fewer of them, or
should it be smaller, in which case, um, it
may be less likely to reproduce, survive and reproduce,
but I can produce more of them. And so
what we end up with is A situation where
um parents might initially in this kind of theoretical
scenario early on, produce gametes that maybe have a
range of sizes. Um, BUT if two small ones
fuse, you're going to end up with a small
zygote verilla, and that 1 may not survive and
reproduce at all, um, or it may not be
able to, um, And if you, but if you
produce large ones, you're gonna produce fewer of them,
and so they may not be able to find
successfully find uh gametes of the other type. So
this is called the um gamete limitation hypothesis that
something about mate search, um, and gamete search is
critical to the evolution of either smaller gametes or
larger ones. And then the alternative view is, uh,
the gamete competition. Um, HYPOTHESIS that in some sense,
big gametes are a resource, uh, for the small
gametes. So that if small gametes can fuse with
a large gamete, then the resulting zygote is very
likely to, to make it, to be able to
survive and reproduce. And so, um, you're going to
get this sort of disruptive co-evolutionary process whereby you
either end up wanting to, uh, parents can either
decide, OK, I can make fewer large. Gamtes, um,
or I can make many, many small ones, but
I can't do both. And so, some individuals, uh,
may choose to produce many, many small gametes, and
that means that their gametes are going to be
more likely to be the ones, because remember, only
one gamete can fertilize one other gamete. And so,
if there's fewer big gametes, those are a very
limited resource. And so, it might pay to produce
many, many small gametes. That are then more likely
to successfully reproduce the fewer large gametes, whereas the
advantage of producing the large gametes is that those
large gametes by and large are going to be
more likely to survive and reproduce in the first
place. So you end up with a situation where
Initially, individuals are producing gametes that are the same
size, and there are many species today that still
do that. Those are called isogamous species, where the
gametes aren't different sizes, and there are conditions where
that is the more stable strategy for each individual
to produce gametes that are the same size. But
what we see in a wide, wide range of
species is that they have evolved either to produce.
Um, LARGE ones or small ones, or here's critical,
both. There are many, many species, hermaphroditic species that
produce both large ones and small ones. And this
is critical, because what this means is, and by
the, and by the way, here, this is where
we now have the two sexes. So, the evolution
of these different sized gametes is how evolutionary biologists
define the sexes. But notice what it applies to.
It applies to the gametes. You're either producing the
female gamete, which is by definition the large one,
or you're producing the male gamete, which is by
definition the small one, or you can be producing
both of them. So the gametes have a sex,
but the parents might or might not have a
sex. In hermaphroditic species, it doesn't make any sense
to say if you're producing both large gametes and
small gametes, the parent itself doesn't have a sex,
even though it's gametes do. And there are other
species, sequential hermaphrodites, where they produce big ones maybe
to begin with, and then switch to producing small
ones or the other way. Um, AGAIN, it doesn't
make sense necessarily to define the parents, um, as
having a sex. And so this is kind of
a critical distinction when we think about the sexes.
It's really the options in a gamey production game.
What are your options? And what we see in
a very, very wide range of species is you
have two options, only big ones or small ones.
And in fact, that size difference can in many
cases be enormous, a factor of a million to
1, where, where the large gametes are a million
times bigger than the small ones. So, it can
be, you just think about, um, you know, chicken
eggs versus chicken sperm, you know, massive, massive differences
here. Um, SO, it's that early evolution of Um,
this disruptive evolution of gamete size that leads to
these two different sizes, large and small, and that
then sets off a whole set of, of downstream
evolutionary consequences.
Right, so perhaps this would be a good point
to introduce, uh, two questions that I got from
two different interviews I've done on the show. One
of them is already released with Doctor Herman Ponzer,
an evolutionary anthropologist. The other one is going to
come out, I think, in February with Doctor Nathan
Lentz, who's an evolutionary biologist. So, um, I mean,
when it comes to. Defining sex because it's defined
on the on the basis of gametes, I mean,
bear in mind that Dr. Herman Ponzer thinks or
agrees that sex is binary. He told me in
the interview that we talked a little bit about
arguments made by people who think that sex is
not a binary, and he said. Directly that he
thinks a claim like that is not helpful, but
at a certain point I asked him, so on
what basis do we define sex? Is it on
the basis of gametes then? And he said, yes,
but even that is not a perfect definition and
the examples he gave were something like, OK, so
imagine you have a Boy before puberty who's not
yet producing sperm, so is he not a male
yet or is he, is he not a male
and a woman who after menopause is no longer
producing eggs, so does she stop being a female?
I mean, what do you think about that, that
kind of uh idea?
So, this is really where it's important to keep
the distinction between the options in the gamete production
game and how we classify every single individual. So,
the, the, the anisogamy definition of the sexes is
about the types of gametes you produce. And it's
about the two types of gametes. So think about
hermaphroditic. So let me just step back. So what
Ponser is talking about is humans. Uh, WE should
really take humans out of when we're talking about
the evolution of sex and the sex, take humans
out if you want, because we're just one species
out of literally millions of species. And these concepts
are meant to explain. The diversity that we see
across the entire range of eukaryotic species, um, is,
is, and across very deep time, as I've emphasized
over and over the last billion years or more
of evolution. And so, um, A better, you know,
example for, for Herman there would be hermaphroditic species
that produce both large gametes and small gametes. You
can't define the parent. Uh, DOESN'T have a sex
there. Um, THEIR options are still to produce male
gametes or female gametes. Um, BUT the parent itself,
uh, doesn't have a sex. It doesn't make sense
to assign a sex to a, a, a simultaneous
hermaphrodite that simultaneously produces both large gametes and small
gametes. It still, uh, makes a huge amount of
sense to assign a sex to the gametes, small
ones or large ones. And so, The notion of
sex is about your the options uh that you
have. Now, in species like humans. We early on,
um, we kind of flip a coin, and many,
many, many species called gonochoric species or dioecious species,
um, very early on in development, typically flip a
coin, um, a figurative coin. And the figurative coin
might It be a genetic switch like the XY
chromosome system in mammals, or the ZW system in
in birds, for example, or it might be an
environmental sex determination system that we see in many
reptiles. But whatever it is, um, developmental pathways diverge
early. And, um, so that you then are going
to either produce large gametes, or you're going to
produce small gametes. And again, Um, if you wanted
to, you could say, well, this, we can assign
sex to the individuals. Uh, BUT what you're really
doing is saying, are you going to be producing
large gametes, or are you going to be producing
male gametes, the female gametes, the large gametes, or
male gametes, the small gametes. So, the two sexes
are really about the options in the gamete production.
Um, GAME, not about classifying every single individual out
there during every single phase of their life. Again,
think about sequential hermaphrodites. Uh, THEIR life cycle, um,
they're going to produce large gametes at one point
and small gametes at another point. And so it
doesn't really make any sense to assign a sex
to that individual across their entire lifespan. It's really
about the gamete production options. And so that's, I
think, where folks like, uh, like Herman are, are
really. Asking the wrong question.
OK, that, that's a very interesting point. Uh, AND
now the other thing that I talked about with
Doctor Nathan Lentz who just recently, uh, earlier this
year released the book, The Sexual Evolution. I mean,
it's actually a very interesting book. It talks about
the things like homosexuality or same-sex behaviors across. The
animal kingdom and he also talks about trans people.
I don't think he directly makes any claims about
sex being binary or non-binary in the book, but
we also talked about that in our conversation and
at a certain point he made the claim that
Uh, species that are hermaphrodites should be classified as
a third sex. I mean, what do you think
about that?
Again, my, my answer would be sex is about
your options in the gamete production game, and by
game I mean an evolutionary scenario where organisms, you
know, make a decision, scare quotes there. Uh, ABOUT
what gametes they're going to produce, and there's just
this very, very striking pattern that's not universal, but
very, very striking that in a very wide range
of species, there are two types of gametes, the
large ones and small ones, and that's it. Um,
THERE'S no third gamete type. So, if you don't
have a third gamete type, there's no third sex.
If there's only two gamete types, Um Then there's,
there's, there's two options in your gamete production game.
Um, NOW there are species, we've talked about isogamous
species, um, where they've got one option. Uh, AND
we've also talked about, but they, their options are
what type do I do? Do I make a
plus type or a minus type of mating type,
or do I have many more types? Um, SO
they have different options in their gamete production game.
And so, yes, the, the concept of sex, uh,
the sex, so sex still applies, but these sexes
does not apply. It really only applies to the
very, very wide range of species that have two
options in their gamete production game. And that's all,
that's it. It's not really about anything else. Um,
IT'S about the downstream consequences that evolutionarily over long
periods of evolutionary time, there are many, many consequences
of that. Um. But, but it's not about trying
to classify every single individual and put them into
some box. Um, THAT, that's not the, that's not
where the explanatory power of this concept comes from.
Um, IT doesn't come from classifying every single individual.
It really comes from what are the evolutionary consequences
of producing large gametes or small gametes or both.
OK, so another thing that you talk about in
your critique of Doctor Fuentes's book is uh why
the ratio of males to females is always close
to 1 to 1. I mean, why does that
happen and why is that aspect important for these
discussions surrounding whether sex is binary or not?
Yeah. So that's one of the really critical consequences,
evolutionary consequences of anisogamy, of having two sexes and
of sexual reproduction. So with sexual reproduction, every individual
has 2 and only 2 parents, and that's where
the that's the ultimate source of the sex binary
is the fact that we are all the product
of 2 and exactly 2 parents. Um, NOW, not
all sexually reproducing species, as I've mentioned multiple times,
uh, have anisogamy, um, but we still all have
2 parents. And what that means is, um, then
if you do have Uh, anisogamy, and you do
have a situation like, um, as humans, you're going
to, every individual is going to have a mother
and a father. Now, what are the consequences of
that for the ratios of males and females in
the population? And this is called the, the Fisher
condition or the Fisher principle. Um, And, and this
was worked out. Even Darwin had a version of
this argument early on. Um, WHAT are the consequences
of that? And the way to think about this
is to think about the two extreme situations. So,
imagine that you have a population with 99 females
and 1 male. In that theoretical, uh, hypothetical situation.
That male is going to be the father of
every single offspring. Because there's only one male, and
every offspring has to have one. Male, one father
and one mother. Um, WHAT that means is that
there's going to be an enormous, um, selection pressure
for the females to begin, who up to this
point have only been producing daughters with very few
males. Um, IF they, the female that gets a
mutation to produce more males, her sons are now
going to be, because there's such an imbalanced sex
ratio. Your sons are going to be the fathers
of most of the offspring, which is going to
lead to more selection to produce more males. And
what you're going to eventually get is that the
number of males increases relative to the number of
females, and you now approach a 50/50 sex ratio.
And if you flipped it around and say, uh,
there were 99 males and 1 female, then that
female will be the mother of every offspring. And
so then there would be an evolutionary advantage to
be producing more daughters rather than sons, and that
would again move the sex ratio back to fifty-fifty,
typically. So, it's that dynamic that we think explains
why in most sexually reproducing species, the sex ratio
is close to 1 to 1. And again, that's
one of the explanatory benefits of the sex binary
is it explains these widespread patterns that we see.
Um. And so that is, if you um If
you start to reject the sex binary, you have
to then begin to help, OK, what's your explanation?
You need to have a better explanation for that
kind of dynamic than the one that we already
have. And so far, Um, and all these folks
that claim that sex is not binary, I haven't
really seen any attempts to provide that. Now, maybe
somebody, somebody, somebody will. Uh, SCIENCE is always in
flux. Uh, BUT that's, that's your challenge. If you
want to challenge the sex binary, you have to
challenge these kinds of explanations that have been very
successful at explaining widespread patterns in nature.
Talking about the sex binary in Doctor Fuentes's book,
he talks about uh uh Thomas Locker's account of
Western ideas about sex, and that's actually something that
you include in your critiques. So, uh, what do
you make of his using of Thomas Locker's account
of that?
Yeah, so this was the first I'd ever, uh,
heard of this account, um, and I was, it
was interesting. I, I was glad that, uh, Fuentes
brought this up. Um, Um, Laqueur is, I believe,
a historian. And um He had this um Um,
one sex model that was apparently, and again, I'm,
I'm not a historian, and this is, this was
the first time I had come across this, but
it was, it was definitely interesting, um, that Galen,
who was a physician in ancient Rome, around that
shortly after the birth of Christ, I think in
like the 1st century, um, so, 2000 years ago,
roughly. Um, HE made this claim, and so Galen
was, and, and actually Galen was, is a fascinating
figure. Um, HE, uh, conducted hundreds and hundreds of
dissections and really detailed analyses of anatomy and physiology,
and his ideas really dominated Western medicine for 2000
years, um, almost 1500 years. So, he's really remarkable.
Character, um, hugely influential and got a lot of
stuff right. Um, HE was really based on, you
know, empirical investigations of human physiology and anatomy and
animal physiology and anatomy. I wrote extensively, um, and
he made a comment. Uh, THAT all the parts
that men have, women have two, the difference between
them lying in only one thing, namely that in
women, the parts are within the body, whereas in
men, they're outside. So he's looking at the genitalia
and he's kind of seeing some analogies between The
external genitalia of men, um, and the internal genitalia
of women. And from this, uh, because Galen was
such an influence on thinking in the West, Laqueur
um claims that um. Western conceptions of sex were
not binary, that they were unitary. Um. And, um,
so this is, you know, really dramatic claim. Is
that really true? Is that, did we not really
have this concept of, of men and women, uh,
throughout the history of the West? Uh, SO I
did just a little bit of digging. It didn't
take long. I, I kind of went to Wikipedia
right away and immediately found that there were many,
many critiques of this by other historians who were
equally, if not, um, more familiar with the literature
that Lacour was talking about. Um, AND, um. One
of the, the, the main ones that I came
across was Katherine Park, who had written a recent
article that I read. Um, AND she really goes
through the whole argument and pretty convincingly takes apart,
uh, Lacour's argument, um, showing where it comes from,
showing that it really, um, that this was not
the, the, the reigning model in, in Western history,
and really identifying a lot of weaknesses in Lacour's
scholarship. Now, I'm not a historian. I can't judge,
uh, but I can say at least that there
is vigorous debate about this concept in the historical
among historians, and that at least to an outsider
like me, um, there's pretty convincing, uh, criticisms of
it that suggest we shouldn't take it too seriously.
Uh, ANOTHER question, what do you think about Fuentes's
use of terms like, uh, I mean, these, uh,
these, these are terms that I, I think he
invented for the book just for the sake of
simplicity. He uses terms like 3G males and 3G
females, and by 3G he's referring to gametes, Gnets,
and gent. And what he means by that or
what he tries to imply with that is that
there are some males and some females who do
not have uh uh precise correspondence uh between gametes,
gonads, and genitals. There's variation in that sense. So
what do you think about uh his use of
those terms?
Yeah, before I get to that, I just, uh,
I wanted to say one more thing about the,
the liqueur issue. It took me 5 minutes to
find criticisms of this model, and Fuentes kind of
leads off his major section on sex in humans
with Liqueur's model, implying that this is somehow fact.
And the fact that I could just very, very
quickly, uh, find criticisms of that and the fact
that Fuentes didn't. Um, DO that himself, or if
he did do it, he failed to report it.
That would even be worse, I think, in his
book. I really kind of shows the weakness of,
of the scholarship of the book, um. If he's
going to kind of highlight this model, which has
been very influential, he's absolutely right about that, um,
at least from what I can tell as a
non-historian, but um, it looks like Lacour's model really
did have a big impact. And even his critics
sort of credit Lacour with kind of raising this
issue. What are the historical concepts of, of sex
and the sexes throughout history? That is a really
interesting question. And, and it doesn't have to be
a binary concept by any means. Um, THAT'S just.
Um, BUT the fact that there, there are these
really substantial criticisms and the fact that Fuentes doesn't
even mention them. Um, OR weigh them against each
other. Um, I, I think really typifies a lot
of the book here. Now, getting to your question
about his terms, I have no problem with him.
Uh, INTRODUCING new terms. All of us, all of
us scientists do that. Um, WE have certain ways
that we want to conceptualize things and so we
create new terms to do that. It's perfectly legitimate,
um. Those terms are not ones that I'm planning
to adopt. I don't find them very useful or
informative or insightful, but that's me. Uh, EVERY scientist,
every scholar needs to kind of make that decision
for themselves. So, yes, it's part of our job
as, as scholars to, if we think there are
important distinctions to be made, um, to then, if
we think it's, uh, Um, going to be helpful
to invent new terms and the fact that Fuentes
does this is just what, what we all do.
So yeah, perfectly acceptable. I have no problems with
that.
Uh, YES, but, uh, I was also trying to
ask you more about the idea behind, uh, those
terms. So the, uh, the fact that there's not,
uh, always a perfect correspondence between gametes, gonads, and
genitals, um, when it comes to, uh, males and
females in this case. So, uh, do, do you
think that that is a useful idea to keep
in mind when it comes to thinking about Sexual
diversity or not.
Yeah, so again, we're right back to the human
specific case where what I'm trying to emphasize is
that these concepts of sex, uh, and the sexes
really apply across millions of species over deep evolutionary
time, and we don't need to think about humans
at all when we're applying them. Now, when we
get to humans, this is again where what does,
would those distinctions matter for the evolution of our
species? Fuentes doesn't make any argument that they would.
So, at this point, we're not really trying to
elucidate human evolution or the evolution of other species.
Um, WE'RE really trying to classify all humans and
put them into various boxes of various sorts. And
it might be useful, absolutely, uh, for certain, you
know, if you're a medical doctor, uh, and you're
treating patients, these kinds of classifications could be really
critical. Um, SO, in certain contexts, in the human
case, Absolutely, um, these distinctions might be absolutely important
and very critical. If we're trying to think about
social roles in humans, where we often do make
decisions about social roles based on sex and And
other considerations. Yeah, this, this could be really, really
important. Um, SO, I don't think there's much case
to be made, very strong case, or at least
one case doesn't make one, that there's any sort
of evolutionary consequences of this, uh, downstream or that
it really explains much about human evolution. But for
many, many other issues, it might be really, really
important to keep these distinctions in mind. So, again,
I have no problem with making these distinctions. As
long as we begin to understand where they would
be useful and where they're not going to be
useful, um.
Right. Uh, ANOTHER thing that you talk about in
your critique is the Bateman gradient. What is that
and why does it matter for this discussion?
Again, as I'll, as I'll say over and over
and over, this is a concept that applies across
a wide range of species, and the question is,
does it, uh, what is the evidence for it?
What's the theory behind it? Um, CAN we challenge
it? And um so basically what it means is,
the abatement gradient is the extent to which Um
Your biological fitness. Correlates with the number of mates.
And so As an individual, male or female, uh,
has one mate, 2 mates, 3 mates, 4 mates,
what impact does that have on their fitness, the
ability to produce offspring that themselves survive and reproduce.
And so, The argument Is that in many cases,
um, The species that produces the smaller gametes is
going to have a steeper Bateman gradient, that is,
that acquiring additional mates would have would increase their
biological fitness more than the other sex. So that's
what the Bateman gradient is. It's the slope of
fitness on number of mates. And the question is,
does this differ? You know, is that slope zero?
What is the slope? And does it differ between
the sexes, between males and females in species where
that distinction makes sense? Um, THESE would be the,
um. And It's generally taken to be an index
of sexual selection. If it matters that you are
going to have higher fitness if you have two
mates or gain access to two mates than 1,
and 3 mates more than 2, more than 1,
then for the sex for which that is true,
there's going to be a lot of Uh, competition
for getting access to that limited number of mates.
Remember, by the Fisher principle, generally the, the ratio
of the sexes is roughly 1 to 1. And
therefore, uh, mates are a limited resource. And so,
the batement gradient, um, the steeper it is, the
stronger we think sexual selection is. Um, THAT there
would be a greater benefit to either outcompeting members
of your own sex, called intrasexual selection for members
of the opposite sex, or by, uh, convincing, um,
the opposite sex, uh, being better at convincing the
opposite sex to mate with you, in. Sexual selection,
uh, for example. So that's, that's what that means,
and that's why that those are the evolutionary consequences
of it, we think. Um, NOW, I will say
there's been lots of criticism of this, and some
of those criticisms have hit home. Um, THIS is
a scientific concept. Scientific concepts are always up for
debate, always up for criticism, um, and there have
been. A large empirical test does this hold true
across animals, and it looks like, yes, it does.
Um, THERE'S pretty strong evolutionary or empirical evidence um
that um It does, uh, have an impact on,
on sex roles the way that we have thought
it does. And there's also mathematical modeling that shows
that it works. Um, SO, so far, we have
good reason to believe that the Bateman ingredient exists,
that there's a sex difference, that it does have
these evolutionary implications, but I think most folks that
are in this area would say, um, more research
on this is needed, more theoretical work and empirical
work will be, will be informative.
So there's a very, very big topic in evolutionary
biology that we have to address here since we're
talking about sex and for species that of course
reproduce sexually and we're um distinguishing between males and.
Females makes sense. That is sexual selection. So why
is sexual selection so important and do you think
that we could still explain it if sex was
not binary?
Yeah, so, um, in species with two sexes, sexual
selection is related to this Bateman gradient, um. And
Again, the idea that uh Um, the sex that
produces the larger gametes is going to produce fewer
of those gametes, and the sex that produces smaller
gametes in species where this distinction makes sense, um,
is going to produce more of those gametes. Um.
And so, sexual selection means that there's going to
now be competition for those relatively few gametes, um,
those few large gametes. Um, AND this idea was
first put out there by Darwin. In fact, he
wrote a whole book on it. And it, it's,
was aimed at explaining, again, this widespread pattern that
we see across many, many animal species and even
plant species, sexual selection can operate in plants, we
think. There's still, there's more debate about that than
there is for animals. Um. But there are sex
differences. Um, THE sexes are not identical, and it,
and a lot of those differences are rather puzzling.
Um, THEY seem to be traits that don't have
any obvious utility for the individual in terms of
their ability to acquire food or resources or defend
themselves from predators. Um, AND in fact, they seem
to, in many cases have, would have the opposite
effects on that. And so Darwin was attempting to
explain. This widespread pattern, not universal, but um pretty
common that there are these often striking sex differences,
many of which are rather puzzling. Um, AND so
he proposed that The sex differences arose by uh
what he called sexual selection. And this is a
principle that's very widely regarded as, as being really
important to explaining the diversity that we see in
the living world. Um, AND so, the typical examples
would be, of course, the peacock's tail, but basically,
uh, males, um, Either being very uh physically larger
than females and having bigger weapons, which would suggest
that males are competing with other males for access
to females, or females being really brightly colored or
engaging in elaborate behaviors, or providing resources to females,
um, where they seem to be competing for um
female choice, intersexual selection. Um, SO these patterns are
the, the types of phenomena that sexual selection theory
aims to explain.
Mhm. Uh, SO, uh, another thing that, uh, Doctor
Fuentes talks about in his book has to do
with
the, maybe I should interrupt right here. The question
is, uh, because you asked the, the important thing,
and I didn't answer, which is what if we
got rid of the two sexes, we wouldn't. What
would, how would that alter this theory if there's
more than one sex, I mean more than two
sexes, um. And the critics, the folks that are
proposing. You know, these non-binary or, you know, sex
as a spectrum theory haven't even tackled this, you
know, how, what they attempt to do is, is
try and undermine this theory. Now, does sexual selection
still have a lot of open theoretical questions? Yes.
Does it still have open empirical questions? Yes. But
I want to emphasize that it's been very successful
at explaining many, many traits that would be very
difficult to explain otherwise. And if you want to
offer an alternative account, You need to provide a
better explanation that better accounts for the empirical evidence
than the theories that we have right now. And
so far, that has not happened. So, maybe it
will, um, if folks want to pursue that, I
encourage them to do so. I'm sure other evolutionary
biologists would as well. Uh, BUT we really don't
have any reason to abandon it at this point.
Um, THIS, you know, abandon this very, very successful
theory, which involves the dynamics between two sexes, male
and female.
Yes, that, that's a very important point as well.
Um, TALKING about behavioral sex differences because that's also
something that Doctor Fuentes talks about in his book.
Um, TO what extent do they derive from differences
in reproductive biology between the sexes?
Well, some of them are pretty dramatic. So, think
about mammals. Females typically have mammary glands, males typically
do not, um, or at least ones that don't
work. And so, females are gonna be the ones
nursing. They're the ones gonna be getting pregnant. They're
gonna be the ones, uh, nursing offspring. Um. And
males typically are not. Um, AND so there can
be pretty dramatic differences in sex roles in, in
species, and again, there's still quite a bit of
debate about how this evolves, um. But yeah, what
we see is that um often males are going
to be in mammals anyway, and um again, we
need to be really careful that um the conditions
of each particular species matter. Things like Mortality rates
and sex ratios, um, and what are known as
operational sex ratios and adult sex ratios, there's lots
of subtleties to the theories, um, but they often
can, um, explain empirical patterns where we see females,
uh, doing all the offspring care and males doing
almost none, or we can see the reverse where
males are doing the care and females are doing
none, or where there's bi-parental care, um. And so,
again, these theories are explaining why we can see
the evolution of sex roles, um, and why we
see them in one way in some groups of
species and a different way in other groups of
species. Um, SO, absolutely, um, differences in gamete size
can lead to differences in the physiology of two
sexes can then lead to differences, um, and pretty
dramatic differences in the behaviors of the two species.
Um, AFTER all, um, I mean, even plants have
behaviors in, in a, in a very general sense.
So, uh, you don't survive and reproduce without doing
something, without changing your environment somehow. And the fact
that you're producing large gametes versus small gametes means
the kinds of things you need to do, the
kinds of alterations that you need to make to
your environment, uh, can differ in many cases pretty
dramatically.
And even when there's variation in terms of, for
example, certain species where the male perhaps might invest
more in the offspring, might participate more in parenting,
um, those, even that variation can be explained by
addressing it or approaching it as sex being binary,
correct? Yeah, absolutely, so. And again, that's, that's our
challenge as scientists is to go out in the
world and observe the world and we see this
diversity and then we use our theories, our concepts
to try and explain it. And our theories have
been pretty good, but not perfect. There's still lots
of work to do here. Um, AND the question
is, will You know, ditching the sex binary concept,
give us a better explanation. So far, it has
not. Um, AND then really the attempts really haven't
even tried to. So, they've really just kind of
said, you know, we see this kind of diversity
in phenotypes, kinds of things that you brought up
earlier, where the genitalia may not match or the
um Components of of sex chromosomes may not exactly
match the the norm or the typical version, um.
And that's absolutely true. Those things absolutely exist, but
what are the evolutionary consequences of that? Um, WE
have lots of, of pretty interesting theories that have
made a lot of progress, um, building off the
anti-isogamy concept, and, um. We can't just ditch all
of those theoretical successes. Um, WITHOUT some really clearly
superior alternative.
Um, SO in terms of behavioral sex differences, there's
one aspect that I, I mean, in the particular
case of humans is very interesting in the, in
the partic approaching it from an anthropic, of course,
an anthropological perspective that has to do with the
sexual division of labor. So, um, do we know,
uh, to what extent, uh, the sexual division of
labor derives from Uh, sex differences between, uh, men
and women and not, for example, uh, aspects having
to do with culture or ecology or some other
aspects of the environment.
Yeah, we really don't. So, the sexual division of
labor, which means that, uh, males tend to do,
and again, this is in humans, um, and we
might see it in, in other species as well.
Um, BUT This is something that's very widely observed
in human societies, that there tend to be, at
least in certain domains of life, that Uh, women
typically engage in and other domains where men typically
engage. So the, the classic example would be in,
in most hunter-gatherers, um, what we see. Is that,
uh, most of the hunting, especially of large game,
would be done by the males, and most of
the, um, but males would also engage in gathering
plant foods. But a lot of the, what the
females would often be doing is um Gathering, um,
plant foods and, um, hunting smaller game is not
that uncommon either, and, uh, caring for, for kids.
Um, SO this is a pretty common pattern. Now,
the question is what explains that pattern, and there's
lots of debate, and there should be lots of
debate, uh, and we need lots of debate, and
we need more, uh, theoretical, uh, empirical investigations as
well. Um, BUT the basic Idea, there's a, there's
a couple, you know, 2 or 3 really important
ideas here that, um, have been pretty influential, not
proven. Um, BUT big game is, uh, brings in
lots of calories, but it's also pretty variable. Um,
THERE'S a lot of variation. Uh, YOU may go
days or even longer, um, before getting your next,
you know, wooly mammoth, um, or even large bison.
Um, WHEREAS plant resources and small game tend to
be, you don't bring as much, as many calories
in, but they're much more reliable. And so, one
of the big advantages of a division of labor
of any sort is efficiency, that you get one
class of individuals specializing in one task and then
being particularly good at it, and another class of
individuals specializing in, in another task and being particularly
good at that. And then, but both tasks are
essential. You can't, you can't rely on one or
the other. You need both. Um, AND so, one
of the main arguments for the sexual division of
labor in hunter-gatherers in humans is the efficiencies that
come from one group of individuals, typically the males,
uh, specializing in these high risk, high return resources.
And, um, another group of individuals, the women, specializing
in lower return but lower risk resources and also
specializing in childcare. And uh you need both, um,
that it's a fully cooperative, interdependent relationship between men
and women that is much more efficient than both
sexes trying to do both things, um, or not
cooperating at all, which is what we see in
many, many mammal species, is that there's no cooperation.
So, the idea here is that humans entered this
niche, this ecological niche, and you brought in and
it is related to ecology here. Where there were
these very valuable resources out there, these large game,
but they were really high risk, um, and required
high levels of skill, um. And so it took
years to master the skills necessary to track these
animals and successfully kill them. Um, AND so, our
big brains and our long childhoods, um, and the
sexual division of labor all kind of evolved in
concert. Equally, um, figuring out all the right plants
to find and how to process them, uh, to
extract maximum resources, that takes a lot of skill.
Raising kids, enormously cognitively demanding, that takes a huge
amount of skill. So, each sex specializing in these.
Very cognitively demanding domains, um, and then cooperating with
each other would have led to enormous efficiency. So,
that's, that's the theory behind it. Um, IS that
theory universally accepted? No. Do we need more empirical
research? Yes. Do we need more theory theory development?
Yes. Um, BUT there's a pretty, pretty strong empirical
pattern that we do need to explain. Um, AND
there's some pretty, pretty convincing theoretical arguments for, for
the, um, appearance of that pattern, um. So that's
That's my brief summary.
Yeah, uh, what do you make of, uh, uh,
Doctor Fuentes's saying that we are a biocultural species
and the idea there is that we should not
just focus on our, uh, um, on the aspects
of our biology but also on The fact that
we have culture and culture that is much more
complex than uh the culture we find in any
other species at least that we know of. So
what do you make of that?
Oh, I would agree with that. I think most,
uh, anthropologists would agree with that absolutely, um, that
our genetic inheritance is critical, but our cultural inheritance
is too. And so, um, the fact that we
are a biocultural species, I think that's, um, widely
accepted in, in anthropology. Um, AND I, I would
say it's also pretty widely accepted across the life
sciences and the social sciences. I don't think it's
a very controversial statement. Um, THERE'S still lots of
debate about the details of that, um, useful debate
and useful empirical research, exactly how we should conceptualize
our cultural inheritance and how we should exactly characterize
our biological inheritance. Um, THAT'S, those are all very
important and useful debates, but the fact that both
are, are essential to who we are as a
species, I think is, is correct and, and very
widely accepted.
OK, so, uh, you were an evolutionary anthropologist. Uh,
WHAT is your take on sex and gender? Do
you think that it is important to distinguish between
them? Uh, DO you do it yourself?
Yes, I do do it and I do think
it's critical. So, we have many, um, and so
we talked about these, these roles, uh, these kind
of typical sexual division of labor, um, in, in,
in hunter-gatherers, but we, we see more diversity in
that. Um, AND so we humans. Uh, FOR whatever
reason, again, we might debate why that is, but
we, uh, folks tend to be in various roles
in society. Um, ENGAGING in some kinds of tasks
versus others. Now, we do see that, of course,
in other species where females and mammals, for example,
uh, do most of the, um, parental investment in
birds. It's often by parental investment. So those would
be roles. Um, AND we humans, um, Have even
more complex social roles. We have some, the ones
that I just talked about with the sexual division
of labor in, in human hunter-gatherers, uh, but we
have other roles, and often, uh, those are conceptualized,
um, in terms of sex. So, the, the female
role, the male role, but there might be a
third gender role, um. And, um, so there are
many societies that have a third gender or or
multiple genders. And so, I, I, that's an old
concept in anthropology and the social sciences that we
should kind of distinguish biological sex, which is producing
large gametes or producing small ones. Um, FROM in
humans, the various roles that we assign the sexes,
um, culture, and, and these do vary across cultures.
So this is kind of where that biocultural perspective
would be useful, um, that we need to think
about the interaction of sex and, uh, gender. And
that's exactly why we shouldn't, uh, try to conflate
them. And so Fuentes in his book tries to
kind of conflate this into a single concept. And
I would argue that it's critical to keep them
separate, precisely so that we can understand their interaction,
because they do interact, but you can't understand the
interaction between two factors if you don't keep those
two factors distinct, um, the distinction between biological sex,
for which there are two, and Uh, gender roles
for which there may be multiple. There may be
one, maybe there's one gender role, maybe there's 2,
maybe there's 3, maybe there's more. Um, WE need
to keep those two concepts distinct so that we
can precisely understand exactly how they do interact. And
there's still tons of tons of work to be
done in that area. There's still a lot, uh,
that we don't know about that.
Uh, IN what ways, uh, just to ask you
a little bit more about that point, in what
ways do you, would you say that Doctor Fuentes
conflates or at, at certain points in the book,
perhaps conflates the sex and gender? Well,
he explicitly does it. He says, I'm going to
refer to these as sex gender, I think is
the term, uh, he uses. Let me, um, just
quickly, yeah, he refers to them as gender sex.
Um. So he is very explicitly conflating, uh, and
here's the quote from, from his book, um. That
uh he wants, he needs, he wants to conflate
uh gender and sex into a single concept to
reflect the intertwined biocultural reality of bodies and experiences
more accurately. Um. And Um, but you can't do
that if you, if you conflate those into a
single concept. You need to keep them distinct in
order to understand that interaction and how they do
interact because the interaction is complex, um, and does
differ across cultures and it is really important to
our lives. Um, WE'RE, we're constantly debating that, um,
as, and we probably always have, uh, you know,
the, these debates are not new. Um, AS an
anthropologist, if you look into the ethnographic literature. Uh,
DEBATES and conflicts over gender roles and conflicts, uh,
between the sexes are ubiquitous, and they, they always
have been and they probably always will be, and
that's OK. Uh, BUT to understand that scientifically and
to make progress, um, would be very, very difficult
if we can't keep those two concepts distinct.
Right. So, uh, I have now a question. I,
I was actually going to ask you one single
question, but I'm going to divide it into two
questions because I think that we should do that.
So, uh, about intersex individuals, how should we account
for them or people who we now say have
differences of sexual development?
Yeah, I mean, that's a critical question for us
humans, um, and we scientists can only provide. Uh
Some insights, but we can't provide answers because this
is ultimately how we as a society want to
treat people. And um, So we can, we can
begin to understand scientifically why that happens, um. And
Uh, what impacts it has on phenotypes and including
cognitive and psychological phenotypes and physical phenotypes. And we
can provide. Evidence of that and explanation for that.
But ultimately, um, society, the, the individuals themselves, um,
and, and society at large, um, Needs to really
debate those kinds of questions. And um So I,
I am very much. Opposed to scientists stepping into
the roles of community. Um, YOU know, political leaders
or religious leaders or uh moral leaders. Um, WE
scientists have screwed that up way more than we've
gotten it right. We have been on the wrong
side of history so often. Um, AND just think
about, uh, Doctor Watson, who just recently passed away,
you know, one of the most brilliant scientists, um.
And yet it was on the wrong side of
history when it, when it came to, to race.
We have so many examples and think of Darwin.
Um, HIMSELF, he was really progressive when it came
to, um, concept, you know, the social issues of
slavery, um, and, um, even, you know, recognizing that.
All humans are human and the similarities between us
or among us are vastly outweigh the differences, but
he wasn't so progressive when it came to Uh,
gender equality. Um, AND so, being a scientist doesn't
give us, uh, any insights on how to, or,
uh, any special authority on, on, on, on how
we should organize our societies. Um, AND, and Steve
Gould is, is really good on this. He wrote
a, wrote a whole book, um, really making the
case for distinguishing moral leadership. And human rights from
knowledge of the, of the scientific knowledge of the
world. Um, THESE are really two separate domains, and
it would be really important to, again, that would
be another thing that we don't want to conflate.
So when it comes to intersex individuals, um, We
scientists can provide a little piece of it, but
the bigger piece is, you know, human rights, um,
everybody, um, Has a right to live a full,
uh, you know, full and a full life and
a, a, a happy life, a productive life, um,
fully participate in society. Um, THOSE are the kinds
of issues where we need moral leadership. Um, AND
if you look into the literature, I'm, I'm, again,
I'm not an expert on this at all, but
none of the literature on this mentions anything about
the biology of sex. All of the literature on
human rights and morality really deals appropriately, I think,
with those kinds of issues. Um, AND so, Um,
that's what I would say, um, about those kinds
of topics.
Mhm. Yeah, I, I mean, I've even had on
the show, uh, a discussion last year, I think
it was last year with, uh, two psychologists, um,
about, uh, gender, and we, we were talking about,
uh, trans people and homosexual people also because they're
lesbians themselves and, Uh, I mean, at a certain
point, we were talking about how, I mean, it,
it, for in, uh, for the case of human
rights and human, uh, and people who are LGBTQ
plus, having human rights and having access to work
and housing and all of that. I mean, it
doesn't really matter that much whether uh people are
born this or that way if they are born.
Born homosexual or if they are born trans, for
example, or if they uh develop in certain kinds
of ways as homosexual or not. I mean, I,
I know, I know that uh there's lots of
evidence and uh I even talked about that with
Doctor Nathan Lentz when we had our conversation about
his book, The Sexual Evolution that, uh, homosexuality and
same-sex behaviors have a lot of, have a very
strong biological basis to them, but Even if they
didn't have, I don't think that would be very
relevant as to whether uh people who are homosexual
or people who are uh transgender or people who
are bisexual or whatever should have uh human rights
as any of, of, uh uh as uh hetero
heterosexual people or cis people have rights. I mean,
I, I don't think that's very relevant, at least
in my opinion.
Yeah, I would agree with you. Um, IT would
be really dangerous to base our human rights on
scientific theories, because if those theories turn out to
be wrong, that would undermine our rights. So we
really want to keep our rights, uh, untied to
any specific. Scientific theory because we don't want those
rights to be undermined uh by evidence that those
theories might be incorrect. And that, that goes for
whether you think sex is binary or you don't.
Uh, DON'T, don't base our human rights on, on
science, which is always unsettled. We never, um, you
know, the physicists have come up with theories that
uh, uh, made. You know, mind-bogglingly accurate predictions. And
yet physicists know their theories are incomplete. Um, SO,
even the, even the folks that have come up
with the best scientific theories ever, uh, know that
their theories are, are not the last word. And
so, if they, if they have that attitude, we
need to have that attitude too, that our, our
scientific theories are always subject to being questioned and
undermined. And that's exactly why we can't base our
human rights, um, and our human societies on any
single theory. These theories can inform. Debates about human
rights, but they can't determine them. Um, AND this
is called, um, and, and again, Steve Gould is
really good on this is called the naturalistic fallacy
where we think that the way the world is
or the way that we think it is, um,
is the way that it should be. Um, AND
there's, there's no obvious connection between, between, um, the
way things are and the way Where they should
be. Um, FOR example, we know that humans can
be, uh, murderously violent and, and aggressive. Um, THAT'S
an empirical fact. What the explanation for that is,
of course, is up for debate. But the, but
the fact that that is true, doesn't mean it
should be true. Um, WE should always strive for,
for more peaceful and, and productive societies, um, despite
evidence, uh, that we've often failed to do that.
So I asked you about intersex individuals, let me
ask you now directly about, uh, trans people, of
course, um, I mean trans people, uh, if I
understand it correctly, uh, don't really, uh, I mean,
whether whatever we think about them don't even, uh,
don't really have a bearing on whether sex is
bi. Binary or not because uh being trans orse
has to do with uh gender identity. So, um,
but, but, uh, uh, as an evolutionary anthropologist, how
do you approach trans people? I mean, are they,
uh, just part of a normal human variation in
terms of gender identity?
Yeah, I don't know. And as I said at
the beginning of, of, uh, the interview here, um,
I'm not an expert in the evolution of sex
or of the sexes or even of, of sex
in humans, um, even though I draw on some
of these theories. So, you know, in our previous
interview, we talked about depression and drug use, suicide.
Those are the areas where, where I'm a specialist,
uh, mental health and, and evolutionary medicine, not, uh,
and so I, uh, as little as. I know
about um the evolution of sex and the sexes,
I know even less about uh trans and issues
involving trans and and what that is. Um, AND
a lot of the, the diversity that we see
in human sexuality. Um, I'm not an expert in
this area at all. So, um, I think what
I could say is that our scientific theories of
the evolution of the sexes, what we do as
scientists is we always simplify things, you know, our
models. Are deliberately simplified so we can make progress.
And so we have these very, very simple models,
really, that have been pretty darn good at explaining
the diversity uh across uh eukaryotes, um, the diversity
of species. Um, BUT now as we drill down
into all of the complexities of human reality, um,
do our theories, uh, even come close to explaining
this? No, they don't. Uh, WE'RE not, we're not
anywhere near being able to explain what's going on
here from an evolutionary perspective. Um, AND me especially,
I, I know very, very little about these, these
issues, um. Other than, you know, what I see
on Twitter, uh, or, you know, on Blue Sky,
I, I, the issues come up all the time,
but, um, this would require somebody who's really specialized
in this area to, to provide an informative answer.
I'm not that person.
No, that's fair enough. So, uh, let me ask
you then, uh, I, I guess we've already ended
up talking a lot about this throughout our conversation
when we, for example, talked about sexual selection, but
what do you think science could be or would
be giving up if it ditched the binary sex
concept?
Yeah, we'd be giving up a lot, um, we'd
be giving, uh, understanding why are there, um, These
different types of gametes, uh, what impact did those
have downstream on why, uh, The numbers of individuals
that produce each type of gamete tend to be
pretty balanced. We'd be giving up understanding why, how,
uh, different types of tissues like testicles and ovaries
evolved, how different types of genitalia evolved, um, how
the uterus evolved, how parental care evolved. Um, WHY
there are sex differences, why often there are lack
of sex differences. Where do we expect different sex
differences? Where do we not expect them? Why do
we see them in these cases and in these
traits, and we don't see them in other cases
and for other traits. So, the sex binary has
been just enormously powerful at explaining a lot of
the variation. However, This is critical. It doesn't explain
all of the variation. Uh, THERE'S lots of things
that every organism has to do to make its
way in the world, and, uh, reproduction is only
one of those things, and producing gametes is only
one of those things. There are many, many, many
other things, um, that the organism has to do,
and if those things really depend critically on the
environment in which it evolved in which it finds
itself. So, We would be giving up, um, the
explanation for many, many aspects of biological variation, um,
but there are many other aspects of biological variation
that are not explained by, by sex. Um, AND
so we need to, to keep in mind that,
you know, as an entire organism, there, uh, there's
many things we have to do, you know, we
have to digest our food, we have to avoid
predators and avoid toxins, um. And learn lots of
information about our world and You know, form successful
social relationships in the case of humans, um, and
learns all kinds of specialized knowledge and, and those
kinds of things we're going to expect to be
not really dependent on sex in many, many cases.
Um, SO, many, many aspects of our psychology and
our biology do not have to do with sex,
but we would be giving up. Um, ALL of
the areas that do, and there are many, many
areas that profoundly do depend on that, um, our
reproductive physiology, um, sex ratios, um, in many cases,
sex roles, um, And uh I'm happy to give
those up if you provide me uh a more
powerful and better explanation by the standards of science
that we all follow. Uh, BUT until you do,
uh, I'm not giving these up.
OK, so let me address another aspect that Doctor
Fuentes talks about in his book or at least
he alludes to it. Um, DO you think that
the sex binary could be harmful or at least
that perhaps there are people, uh, who might, who
might make use of it in harmful ways?
Yeah, we humans suck. Uh, AND we are very
competitive with each other, and, uh, we often see
the world in a zero-sum way, unfortunately. So, absolutely,
um. Ideas do have consequences, uh, so I agree
with that. And I do agree with the larger
point. That, um. We scientists do have an ethical
responsibility to think about the impact of what we're
doing. We are, you know, by and large supported
by the public. Um, THE public pays our salaries
in many cases, either through their taxes, if we're
at a public university the way I am, or
through their tuition dollars if you're at a private
university or through. Um, YOU know, donor dollars or
through grant dollars, which also come from taxes. So
we serve the public. And so when we're doing
our science, our science ultimately needs to serve the
public interest. Um, AND that's why the public is
willing to support us and fund us. They could
be putting their tax dollars to something else. So
we are quite privileged, um, that the public has
by and large, um, elected to contribute a portion
of their hard earned money to us to do
our science. Um, SO we do need to think
about. The ethics of our research and the extent
to which the consequences of it would provide benefits
to the public versus somehow impose costs on them.
And that always does require us to think carefully
about that kind of benefit cost ratio. Um, AND
ideas do have consequences. That's why we're all doing
science because we believe that scientific concepts and ideas
will have consequences, and we hope good ones. Uh,
BUT not always. They may have, uh, they may
negatively impact, um, maybe the public at large. Think
about. You know, the whole debate about biosafety and
doing research with dangerous pathogens, um, doing that research
can provide tremendous benefits. We need to understand those
pathogens in order to better protect ourselves from them.
But if we make a mistake, um, and there
have been lab leaks, um, this is not my
area of expertise at all, but we know historically
there have been. Um, AND so calls for really,
you know, being vigilant about biosafety are really important.
Um, THAT would just be an obvious example. But
when it comes to, you know, ideas like, like
the sex binary, uh, we do need to think
carefully about, um, Because I think it is easy
even for us scientists to commit the naturalistic fallacy.
It's easy for us to slip into thinking, well,
my theory says this is the way things are,
and therefore, it's the way they should be. Um,
IF there was a sexual division of labor in
the past where men were hunting big game and
women were taking care of the kids, that's the
way society should be today. No, um, that's, that's
a classic example of the naturalistic fallacy. So, as
we Do our research and then convey our findings
to the, the public. We do need to kind
of think how is this going to land, um,
and how can we present our results in a
way that maximize the benefits to everyone and minimize
the cost to anyone. Absolutely.
Uh, YES, and there, there's even one way that,
uh, I mean, the sex binary or any other
topic that people might, uh, study scientifically. Uh, COULD
be harmful, not because of, uh, it's not the
fault of scientists, but it's more that there are
people out there, people particularly with political motivations that
might cherry-pick certain aspects of the science, might misrepresent
aspects of the science, or might. Mischaracterize the way
that the scientists do their work or the conclusions
they present from their studies to try to make,
uh, in that case I would characterize it as
a pseudo scientific argument uh for certain kinds of,
um, I mean political. PRACTICES that might harm certain
groups of people. I mean, that's not the fault
of the scientists themselves, but unfortunately there are bad
actors in society and politics like that.
Yeah, there are bad actors. So here's the way
I think about it. Science can only benefit the
public. To the extent that we provide correct explanations
for the world. That's what gives us our leverage
on the world to make things better. So, our,
our first responsibility is to try and get the
science right. And I hope it's been become clear
throughout this that that's hard, that we've made progress,
but we still have a long way, way to
go, and we, we always need to be humble
that uh our current concepts might be, might be
wrong. But we can only benefit the public. To
the extent that we do discover the correct explanation
for something in the world. And so, um, but
once you find those levers, Uh, those levers could
be used for, uh, for good or for ill.
Um, AND so, when we're looking for those levers,
we need to be sure that there's a clear
ethical case, um, for doing so. So just to
take the, the clear example of research on dangerous
pathogens that will give us. Many levers to improve
human health, but it could also give us levers
to create weapons and do all kinds of things
to, to harm literally millions of people. Um, AND
that's going to be obviously much less true for
folks in my discipline. The levers that we find
are going to have much smaller impacts, uh, either
positive or negative, um, but we are searching for
those levers to then provide them to society to,
to make things better. Um, BUT we need to
keep in mind that once we do find them,
there are going to be bad actors. That want
to benefit themselves at the expense. Of everyone else.
And so, we, we do need to think about,
can this lever be used in ways, um Where
it would benefit a small minority of individuals to,
uh, to the detriment of, of the majority. Um.
And I don't have any brilliant insights more, you
know, we're all kind of struggling with, with how
to do this. Um, IT is a very useful
and important debate to have. Um, I don't have
any, any, any magic, any silver bullet here, um,
any magic solution. Um, BUT, um, I, I will,
I will add my voice to the many other
voices that, that it's an important topic and it
needs to be raised and, um, And considered very
fully uh for what we do as scientists, absolutely.
OK, so I have just one last question. I
mean maybe I will have just uh another question
after that, but um do you think that even
with your criticisms of Doctor Fuentes's book and perhaps
the ideas of other people who uh came to
the same conclusion as he did, uh, that most
of the arguments. And the information he presents in
the book are scientific arguments and should be taken
seriously even if we do not agree with his
conclusion and even if perhaps, as you said, he
doesn't provide proper explanations here and therefore these or
that kind of very. ATION within the animal kingdom,
uh, and so on. I mean, do, do you
think that we should, uh, think about that as
a science, as proper science, and address it as
science? And I'm asking you that also because, I
mean, um, I, I interview people from many different
walks of science and I even interview people. Sometimes
from different scientific disciplines that approach the same topic
from different perspectives and they disagree with each other,
but, but I think that's, that's a very healthy
disagreement, but when, when it comes to, for example,
people going on social media and just uh bashing
er other people's work and saying, oh that's just.
Science, we shouldn't take it seriously or if someone
just claims that in this specific case sex is
a spectrum, I mean that's not even something that
we should consider. We shouldn't even take that seriously
from a scientific perspective. It's the same as the
flat Earth or something like that. I mean, do,
do you really think that that's a. A healthy
way of approaching science.
Yeah, I have, I have no problem with, uh,
any scientist that wants to question the role, the
existence of two sexes or anisogamy. Um, It's critical
that scientific theories and frameworks always be subject to
criticism. So, we need to, and we need to
kind of bend over backwards to, um, to allow
that. Uh, SO, I have no problem with Fuentes
or anyone else um taking their shot and seeing,
um, you know, where they can find weaknesses in
the arguments. Um, THAT'S perfectly legitimate, that's normal science.
We need to bend over backwards to allow that,
um, and to encourage that. Um, AND most of
those efforts probably won't. Bear much fruit, that's OK.
Uh, IT'S taken a long time to get where
we are, and it's gonna take a long time
to, to, to, to even get further than this.
Um, SCIENCE is may be frustratingly slow in many
cases. Um. But what we, what we sometimes see
is the opposite, that, um, That it can become,
you know, politically incorrect to say there are two
sexes, uh, even though this is one of the
most powerful, um, Explanatory concepts we have in evolutionary
biology. Um, SO, if you're gonna be open to
the criticisms, you, you have to be equally open
to the existing theory too. Uh, SO that, that,
you know, that. Uh, SWORD cuts both ways, that's,
it's a two-way street to pick your metaphor there,
um. So, yeah, it's, it's perfectly legitimate what what
Fuentes did. I didn't find it very convincing. Um,
I'm not going to change anything I do based
on what he said. Um, BUT I, I, uh,
strongly defend his, his right and prerogative to do
that, absolutely, and I think it is abs, it
is important. Um, AND it actually ironically, you know,
the fact that there have been several attempts to,
to call into question the sex binary, and in
my view, they've been really unsuccessful, that really just
strengthens our confidence in the existing theory, um, that
it's, it's kind of hard to attack it. Um,
SO, yes, let's bring on the attacks, um, and
let's see what, um, what remains standing at the
end of these. Absolutely.
Yeah, great. So Doctor Hagen, uh, just before we
go, would you like to tell people where they
can find your work on the internet?
Um, YEAH, if you just Google Ed Hagan, you'll,
you'll probably find me pretty easily, but, um, I
have a website, uh, Ed Hagan.net, that will take
you to my faculty page or my Twitter account
or my Blue Sky account, um, or feel free
to, uh, it also gives you my email address,
um, so Ed Hagan.net, uh, will get you there.
Great. Uh, I'm also leaving a link to your
critique, to the full critique of, uh, Agustin Fuentes's
book Sexist Spectrum, and Doctor Hagen, thank you so
much for taking the time to come on the
show. It's been a fascinating conversation. Well,
thank you very much for having me, Ricardo.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pancortez or
Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and
Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick
Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.